# TOPIC 10.2 Recursive Searching and Sorting  

# 2.C  

Determine the result or output based on the statement execution order in a code segment containing method calls.  

Determine the number of times a code segment will execute.  

Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# CON-2  

Programmers incorporate iteration and selection into code as a way of providing instructions for the computer to process each of the many possible input values.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# AVAILABLE RESOURCES  

§ Runestone Academy: AP CSA—Java Review: 13.3—Binary Search   
Runestone Academy: AP CSA—Java Review: 13.6—Merge Sort   
Practice-It!:BJP4 Chapter 12: Recursion—Exercises 12.1–12.3, 12.6–12.14, 12.18–12.22   
§ Practice-It!: BJP4 Chapter 13: Searching and Sorting—SelfCheck 12.30  

# CON-2.P  

Apply recursive search algorithms to information in String, 1D array, or ArrayList objects.  

# CON-2.P.1  

Data must be in sorted order to use the binary search algorithm.  

# CON-2.P.2  

The binary search algorithm starts at the middle of a sorted array or ArrayList and eliminates half of the array or ArrayList in each iteration until the desired value is found or all elements have been eliminated.  

# CON-2.P.3  

Binary search can be more efficient than sequential/linear search.  

# EXCLUSION STATEMENT—-(EK CON-2.P.3):  

Search algorithms other than sequential/linear and binary search are outside the scope of the course and AP Exam.  

# CON-2.P.4  

The binary search algorithm can be written either iteratively or recursively.  

# CON-2.Q  

Apply recursive algorithms to sort elements of array or ArrayList objects.  

# CON-2.Q.1  

Merge sort is a recursive sorting algorithm that can be used to sort elements in an array or ArrayList.  

AP COMPUTER SCIENCE A  

# Instructional Approaches  

# Selecting and Using Course Materials  

# Language  

AP Computer Science A is taught using the Java programming language. The Java language is extensive, with far more features than could be covered in a single introductory course. Although students are allowed to use any valid Java statements on the AP Exam, it is recommended that students use Java 7 and stay within the scope of the Java Quick Reference (see page 219). However, given the technical constraints of some schools and classrooms, a minimum of Java 6 is acceptable. Features of Java 8, including Lambda expressions and the Stream API, are not covered on the AP Exam and should not be covered in this course.  

# Textbooks  

The AP Computer Science A course requires the use of a college-level textbook that includes discussion of all the required course content. These college-level textbooks often cover more material than what is required in AP Computer Science A. While this is not a problem and can provide opportunities for extended learning for students with a strong background and a desire to go beyond the requirements, teachers should recognize what is beyond the scope of the course and not feel compelled to teach the entire contents of the textbook. Because this course does not use features of Java 8 and beyond, it is not necessary to have the newest textbook, but it is best that it include information and features of Java 7 (though a minimum of Java 6 is acceptable).  

An example textbook list of college-level textbooks that meet the AP Course Audit resource requirements is provided on AP Central.  

# Choosing an Integrated Development Environment (IDE)  

An integrated development environment, or IDE, is extremely helpful when teaching students how to program. The table that follows shows several free IDEs that teachers of introductory computer science courses have found useful, but the list is not comprehensive. It is important to consider the needs of the students when choosing an IDE. It helps to choose a single IDE that students will use throughout the year. In addition to considering the needs of their students, there are several questions that teachers should ask themselves before choosing an IDE. How difficult or time consuming will it be to learn a specific IDE? What training is available to them, either through online tutorials, workshop consultants, colleagues, or other means? What features do they feel are essential versus nice to have? What features would get in the way of student learning? An IDE should support the teacher and the way they teach, as well as the student learning that takes place in their classroom.  

If an IDE supports autocompletion, we recommend turning off this feature or using an IDE without this feature. Students will have to handwrite their responses to free-response questions, and students who rely heavily on autocompletion during the year may struggle writing code without the IDE.  

# Online Programming Resources  

There are several online resources that allow students to write code to meet a specification and receive real-time evaluation. These resources are a great way for students to get immediate feedback on code that they write, without requiring extensive amounts of time from the teacher. Since the answers for most of these questions are freely available online, they are best used as formative assessments to gauge student understanding.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>IDE</td><td>Platform</td><td>Link</td></tr><tr><td>BlueJ</td><td>Client based</td><td>bluej.org/</td></tr><tr><td>Cloud9</td><td>Browserbased</td><td>aws.amazon.com/cloud9/</td></tr><tr><td>Dr. Java</td><td>Client based</td><td>drjava.org/</td></tr><tr><td>Eclipse</td><td>Client based</td><td>eclipse.org/downloads/</td></tr><tr><td>Greenfoot</td><td>Client based</td><td>greenfoot.org/door</td></tr><tr><td>JGrasp</td><td>Client based</td><td>jgrasp.org/</td></tr><tr><td>IntelliJ</td><td>Client based</td><td>jetbrains.com/idea/</td></tr><tr><td>NetBeans</td><td>Client based</td><td>netbeans.org/</td></tr><tr><td>Repl.it</td><td>Browser based</td><td>repl.it/</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Alternate Sequencing  

One of the biggest considerations when teaching object-oriented programming is when to introduce the creation of a new type by designing a class, which is different from using existing classes to create objects. There are two main options: creating new classes before conditional and iterative statements have been covered, or creating new classes after most other content has been covered. The provided unit guide covers the creation of new classes in Unit 5. If teachers are using a curriculum or textbook that encourages teaching the creation of classes early, it is possible to cover Unit 5 directly after Unit 1 or 2. Once the creation of classes has been covered, all future content should be taught in the context of classes to provide students with more opportunities for practice.  

Unit 10, on recursion, could also be taught at any point after Unit 3. Recursion can sometimes be easier for students to understand if they are exposed to it before iteration.  

# Course Pacing  

Another consideration when teaching the course is how much time to spend covering each topic. AP Computer Science A is meant to be an introduction to computer science and has no programming prerequisite while still being a full and comparable introductory college-level course. Each unit has a suggested number of class periods to spend on the topics within that unit. This is based on 45-minute class periods, meeting five days per week to account for 140 instructional days.  

To help students achieve success, teachers may decide it is necessary to spend more time on the foundational topics in Units 1–4, which are the building blocks for the rest of the course. Students who have a strong understanding of these foundational units are likely to be more successful, because they can focus more on learning new material without continuing to struggle with foundational material. However, more time spent on these fundamental topics will mean less time available to cover some of the remaining topics. Considering the weighting of the remaining units can help determine which topics may be acceptable to cover in less depth if teachers are running short on time.  

# Instructional Strategies  

The AP Computer Science A course framework details the concepts and skills students must master to be successful on the AP Exam. To address those concepts and skills effectively, it helps to incorporate a variety of instructional approaches and best practices into daily lessons and activities.  

The following table presents strategies that can help students develop mastery of the skills by engaging them in learning activities that apply their understanding of course concepts.  

# Programming and Problem-Solving  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Definition</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Code tracing</td><td>Students step through program code by hand to determine how a piece of program code operates. Students analyze thetasks</td><td>Prepares students to determine theoutput of program code, as well as detectand correcterrors in code, when a computer is not available.</td><td>Provide students with code segments containing multiple method calls, and have them trace program execution with various input values, noting which lines getevaluatedandtheorder in which they are executed.</td></tr><tr><td>Create a plan</td><td>in a problem and create a process for completing the tasks by finding the information needed, interpretingdata,choosing how to solve a problem, communicating results, and verifying accuracy.</td><td>Assists in breaking tasks into smaller parts and identifying the steps needed to complete the entiretask.Oneexampleof this is the different phases ofaniterativedevelopment process and how they work together in the completion of a program.</td><td>Given a class-design problem that asks students to model real- world phenomena using a class, students identify the components needed tocreate suchaclass. This involves selecting appropriate attributes and behaviors, including the data typenecessary for each attribute,the information necessary for a given behavior, and what value might be returned.</td></tr><tr><td>Error analysis</td><td>Students analyze an existing solution to determine whether (or where) errors have occurred.</td><td>Allows students to troubleshoot common errors that may arise when they create similar methods and focus on correctingtheseerrors.</td><td>When students begin to write methods, they can analyze the method output and troubleshoot any errors thatmightlead toincorrect output orrun-time errors.By becoming more familiar with the types of errors that may happen, students should be better able to spot them in unfamiliar code.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Programming and Problem-Solving (cont’d)   


<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Strategy Identify a subtask</td><td>Definition Studentsbreakaproblem into smaller pieces whose</td><td>Purpose Helpsorganizethe pieces of a complex problem and</td><td>Example Whenproviding students withafree-response question or other program</td></tr><tr><td>Lookfor a pattern</td><td>outcomes lead to a solution. Studentsobservetrends</td><td>reach a complete solution.</td><td>specification, have them break down theproblem into subtasks.These smallertasks could end up being conditional statements,loops,oreven othermethods. Patternscanbedetected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>by looking at expected output or results based on input and specifications.</td><td>Helps identify patterns that can be used to design program code, generalize program behavior, or identify errors in existing program code.</td><td>whentrying todescribe whata code segment does whenseveraldifferent inputs are provided.These patterns can allow the output of the code to be generalized into a broader description.</td></tr><tr><td>Markingthetext</td><td>Students highlight, underline, and/or annotate texttofocus onkey informationtohelp understand the text or solve the problem.</td><td>Helps students identify important information in the text and make notes about the interpretation of tasks required and conceptsto applytoreach a solution.</td><td>When completing a free-response question, studentsshouldmark parameterstoensure that they know to use them in their solution and, if the method returns a value, what the type is to ensure that they are returning the correct type of value.</td></tr><tr><td>Pair programming</td><td>Two programmers work together as a pair. One (the driver) writes program code,while the other (the observer, pointer, or navigator) reviews each line of program code as it is typed in.</td><td>Reinforces the need for students to explain their process in a way that another student can understand.It also provides built-in support as students are learning new material.</td><td>When studentspractice writing code to fulfill a specification—especially early in theyear when covering the fundamentals ofselectionanditeration— itishelpfulforthemto work in teams. By following the pair programming paradigm, students gain experience both writing and reviewing code and canworktogethertosolve problems when they arise,</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Programming and Problem-Solving (cont’d)   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Definition</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Predict and compare</td><td>Studentsmake conjectures about what results will develop in an activity and confirm or modifytheconjectures based on outcomes.</td><td>Stimulates thinking by making, checking,and correcting predictions basedonevidencefrom the outcome.</td><td>Given asetof methods and input/output pairs, students attempt to match themethodswiththe appropriate input/output pairs. Students then run the methods using the given inputs to confirm their original match selection.</td></tr><tr><td>Simplify the problem</td><td>Students use simpler numbersorstatementsto solve a problem.</td><td>Provides insight into the problem or the strategies needed to solve the problem.</td><td>When introducing recursion, larger problems are discussed in their simplest form for students to understand the"base case"before moving on to</td></tr><tr><td>Think aloud</td><td>Students talk through a difficult problem by describing what the text means.</td><td>Explaining a difficulty aloud engages students with the problem in a new way that puts them in the role of thinking of potential solutions. This trainsstudentstoconsider solutionsforthemselves prior to seeking assistance from a teacher or peer.</td><td>the more general case. Givestudentsarubber duck or otherinanimate object. By describing the problem aloud to the object, students are betterabletoworkoutthe solutionforthemselves.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4">Cooperative Learning</td></tr><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Definition</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Ask the expert</td><td>Students are assigned as "experts"on problems they havemastered;groups rotate through the expert stationstolearn about problems they have not yet mastered.</td><td>Provides opportunities for students to share their knowledge andlearnfrom one another.</td><td>When learning different methods in the String class,the teacher assigns students as"experts" on thedifferentmethods within theJavaQuick Reference (see Appendix). Thereis a stationfor each method,andstudents rotate through stations in groups, working with the station experttocomplete a series of problems using the corresponding method.</td></tr><tr><td>Discussion group</td><td>Students engage in an interactive,small-group discussion.</td><td>Allows students to gain new understanding of or insight into a problem or solution by listening to multiple perspectives.</td><td>Have students read an articleorarticlesona socialorethicalimplication of computer science in the news and then discuss, in small groups, why these are issues and how they might have been avoided.</td></tr><tr><td>Jigsaw</td><td>Each student in a group readsa different text or passage, taking on the role of"expert"on what wasread.Studentsshare theinformationfromthat reading with students from other groups and then return to their original groups to share their new knowledge.</td><td>Students summarize and present information to others in a way that facilitates an understanding of a topic without having each studentread thetextin its entirety; by teaching others,theybecome experts.</td><td>Aftercompletinga free-response question, have different groups of studentslookatdifferent responses to the question, such as student samples found onAPCentral.Once studentshavediscussed their solution, have them get into groups with studentswhoexamined different responses, and have them share the ways in which theresponse was correct.</td></tr><tr><td>Kinesthetic learning</td><td>Students'body movementsareused to createknowledgeor understanding of a new concept. A kinesthetic- tactile learning style requires students to manipulate or touch materials to learn.</td><td>Allows students to gain new understanding of or insight into a problem or solution by acting out the steps taken when executing a code segment.</td><td>Before introducing sorting algorithms, have a group of 10-15studentsput themselves in sorted order based on height, andthenaskparticipants and observerswhatthey noticed abouttheprocess. Draw analogies from the process that students used to a similar sorting algorithm.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Cooperative Learning (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Strategy Sharing and</td><td>Definition Students communicate with another person or a</td><td>Purpose Gives students the opportunity to discuss</td><td>Example Before starting to implementa solution</td></tr><tr><td>responding</td><td>small group of peers who respond to a proposed problem or solution.</td><td>their work with peers, make suggestions for improvements to the work ofothers,and/orreceive appropriate and relevant feedbackontheirown work.</td><td>to a specification,have students determine the classes and methods that they plan on using. Before moving on to implementation, have studentssharetheir designs with others,who willprovidefeedbackand suggestions.</td></tr><tr><td>Student response system</td><td>Students use a classroom response system or other means ofelectronic or nonelectronic communication to send answers or information in response to a question or request.</td><td>Provides immediate feedback on student understanding of material to facilitate instruction.</td><td>When covering object creationand method calls early in the year, a student response system can be used to ensure that all studentsunderstandthe flow ofexecution, allowing for the early correction of misunderstandingsand potentialremediationona foundational topic.</td></tr><tr><td>Think-pair-share</td><td>Students think through a problem alone, pair with a partner to share ideas, and thenshareresultswiththe class.</td><td>Enables thedevelopment of initialideas that are then tested with a partner in preparation for revising ideas and sharing them with a larger group.</td><td>Provide students with a short warm-up problem to solve; this could be a portion of code ora river-crossing brain teaser. Havestudentsworkonthe problem on their own for a setperiod of time and then work with their partner. Have students share their solutions with the class.</td></tr><tr><td>Unplugged activities</td><td>Students use engaging games and puzzles that use manipulatives and kinestheticlearning activities.</td><td>Provides students with a different way of engaging with the material, away from the computer, to further understanding.</td><td>Whenlearning about the structure ofclasses,take a printout of a simple class and cut it into different sections.As students entertheclassroom,hand them an envelope full of the paper strips, and askthemtoreassemble theclassinorder:class header,instance variables,</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Cooperative Learning (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Definition</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Using manipulatives</td><td>Students use objects to examinerelationships betweentheinformation given.</td><td>Provides a tactileorvisual representationofdatathat supports comprehension of information in a problem.</td><td>When illustrating how valuesarepassedtoand returned from methods, have students act as methods and pass a foam ball to different students, and have them pass it back to you after performing their function. Values are taped to the ball to representparametersand return values. To show the needforavariabletostore thevaluereturnedbya</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Making Connections  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Definition</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Activating prior knowledge</td><td>The teacher provides students an opportunity torecall what they already know about a concept and make connections to current studies.</td><td>Prepares students toestablishcontent connections.</td><td>When introducing 2D arrays, have students spend time writing down everything they already know about1D arrays,and then show how thatrelates to 2D arrays.Although there are similarities between thetwo,there aresomedifferencesthat cancauseconfusionifnot addressed early on.</td></tr><tr><td>Diagramming</td><td>Students use avisual representation to organize information.</td><td>Builds comprehension and facilitates discussion by representing information in visual form.</td><td>Use, or have students create,diagrams or flowcharts tovisualize algorithms before implementing those</td></tr><tr><td>Note-taking</td><td>Studentscreatearecordof information while listening to a speaker.</td><td>Helps students accurately understand a concept and keep a record of program examples with correct syntax.</td><td>algorithms in program code. Students take notes on the proper syntaxthatwould be used totraverse a 2D array in row-major order.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Making Connections (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Definition</td><td>Purpose</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td>Paraphrase</td><td>Students restate, in their ownwords,essential information expressed in a text.</td><td>Assists with comprehension,recall of information, and problem- solving.</td><td>Provide students with several methods that accomplish different tasks (such as finding the minimum or maximum, detecting duplicates, etc.), as well as a listof general descriptions like"finds the minimum"or"detects duplicates."Ask students to match the description with the appropriate</td></tr><tr><td>Quickwrite</td><td>Students write for a short, specific amount of time about a designated topic related to a given prompt.</td><td>Generates multiple ideas in a quick fashion.</td><td>To help synthesize concepts after learning about traversals,provide students with code to traverse an array or ArrayList object.Ask them to come up with as many equivalent code segments as they can.</td></tr><tr><td>Vocabulary organizer</td><td>Students use a graphic organizerwith a designated format to maintain an ongoing record of vocabulary words with definitions, pictures, notation,andconnections.</td><td>Provides a reinforcement of learned words and a personal, ever-present tool for building word knowledgeand awareness.</td><td>At the end ofeachunit, reviewthevocabularythat studentsshouldknow and have included in their vocabulary organizer. Providethedefinition,and have students come up withtheirownexamplesor pictures thatwill helpthem rememberthetermslater in the course. There are several apps and websites thathelp studentscreate flashcards and quizzes to help organize the</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Developing Computational Thinking Practices  

Throughout the AP Computer Science A course, students will develop computational thinking practices that are fundamental to the discipline of computer science. Because computational thinking practices represent the complex skills demonstrated by adept computer scientists, students will benefit from multiple opportunities to develop these skills in a scaffolded manner.  

All the multiple-choice questions on the AP Exam will be associated with one of the skills in the tables that follow, so providing students with practice applying these skills will help prepare them for the exam and set them up for success. In addition, each scoring criteria in the scoring guidelines for the free-response questions will be associated with skills in the practice of code implementation. The sample exam questions at the end of this course and exam description show how the questions relate to specific computational thinking practices.  

Practice 1: Program Design and Algorithm Development   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Skills</td><td>Key Tasks</td><td>Instructional Notes</td><td>Sample Activities and Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>1.A: Determine an appropriate program design to solve a problem or accomplish a task.</td><td>Read throughaproblem specification and determine appropriate classesand/ormethods thatneedtobewritten.</td><td>Students will be presented withafree-response questionwheretheywill needtodesignaclass tosatisfythegiven specification.While students arenotassessed onthe qualityof theirspecific design, having practiced designing program code duringclasswillallow studentstomoreeasily interpret the specification</td><td>Marking the text Whenstudentsare reading through a specification,have them highlight nouns and circleverbs tohelp determinewhatclasses might be needed,aswell aspotential attributes andbehaviorsofthose classes. AdditionalStrategies Sharing and</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Practice 1: Program Design and Algorithm Development (cont’d)   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Skills</td><td>Key Tasks</td><td>Instructional Notes</td><td>Sample Activities and Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>1.B: Determine code that would be used to complete code segments.</td><td>Given a section of incomplete program code, students will be askedtodeterminewhich code segment (Boolean expression, loop, if statement,etc.) should be used to complete the program code so that it functions as described.</td><td>Some questions will require studentstodetermine appropriateBoolean expressions to meet the specification. Studentsoftenfindit difficult toreasonthrough decisions that require theuse of theoperator representing not. Teachers shouldprovidestudentswith practice using ! (not), such as in x = !x.The topic of negation isoften difficult for students the first time they see it.</td><td>Think-pair-share Provide studentswith a code segment with a missing expression, and askthemwhat statementshould be usedtocompletethe code segment.After theyhavedetermined what they think,have them share witha partnertosee if they have the same answer andcancometo agreement. Then, have pairs share with the entire class.</td></tr><tr><td>1.c: Determine code that would be used to interact with completed program code.</td><td>Given a section of completed program code (class or hierarchy of classes), students will be askedto determine the correct code segment tocreateobjectsand call methods tomeeta specification.</td><td>whichreferstowhento iterate, not when to stop. Some questions focus on the syntax of a method or constructor call, including handling return values, using thecorrectobject,useof keywords (e.g., new), and proper order of parameters. If a question uses inheritance hierarchies, studentswillneed to demonstrate understanding</td><td>Diagramming Have students create UML diagrams of existing classes and methods and refer to those diagrams when deciding what method calls are legal and appropriate. Additional Strategies</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Practice 2: Code Logic  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Skills 2.A: Apply the meaning</td><td>Key Tasks Given a Java expression,</td><td>Instructional Notes Understandwhich mathematical and logical</td><td>Sample Activities and Strategies Vocabulary organizer Whenintroducingnew</td></tr><tr><td>of specific operators. 2.B: Determine the</td><td>apply mathematical and logical order of operations to compute a result. Given program code</td><td>operators are required for this course by referring to thecurriculumframework. Whenevaluating the</td><td>operators,provide studentswith the name and definition, and then have them come up with their own examples or picturestohelpthem remember the operators and how they function. Additional Strategies ·Activating prior knowledge Code tracing When teaching iteration,</td></tr><tr><td>result or output based on statement execution order in a code segment without method calls (other than output).</td><td>containing conditional statements,iterative statements,or array traversals,determine the value stored ina variable (which could be an array) or what will be printed to the screen.</td><td>result of a program code segment,execution order matters.For example,when using string concatenation, 7 + 5 + "hello"would yield "12hello",while "hello" + 7 + 5 would yield "hello75".</td><td>tracing tables arehelpful for keeping trackof loop variables, other program variables, and output. Have students make a columnforeachvariable in theircode and onefor output.Each time through the loop is represented by a new rowin the table, with the currentvalue of each variable being stored incellson the table. AdditionalStrategies</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Student response system  

continued on next page  

# Practice 2: Code Logic (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Skills</td><td>Key Tasks</td><td>Instructional Notes</td><td>Sample Activities and Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>2.c: Determine the result or output based on the statementexecution order in a code segment containing method calls.</td><td>Given program code that contains calls to instance, static, overridden,or recursive methods, such as Math, ArrayList, and String method calls, determinethevaluestored in a variable(which could be an array or ArrayList) orwhatwillbeprinted to the screen.</td><td>When calling methods, iftheactualparameters are primitive values,a copy of the value is sent to be stored in the formal parameter. Consequently, changes made to the value of the formal parameter inthemethodarenot reflected in the actual parameter. Conversely,if the actual parameters arereference values, then the formal parameteris an alias of the actual parameter (both</td><td>Predict and compare When introducing studentsto a newtype of method call, have them predict the output ofseveral different statementsthatusethat type of method call. Once done,have them create a program that contains thesamestatements and compare actual and expected results. Additional Strategies ·Kinesthetic learning Simplify the problem</td></tr><tr><td>2.D: Determine the number of times a code segment will execute.</td><td>Given program code that contains iteration or recursion, determine the number of times the body of the loop, a given statement, or the recursive call will be executed.</td><td>the method persist after the method is called. When determining the number of times a code segment executes, students should be aware of the boundaries of the iterationto avoidbeing off by one in their count.</td><td>Kinesthetic learning When looking ata recursive method to determine howmany times it executes,have studentscall eachother asrecursivemethods. Students should stand up when"called."The count would beequivalentto the numberofstudentsinthe room who are standing.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Practice 3: Code Implementation  

# Skills  

# Key Tasks  

# Instructional Notes  

# Sample Activities and Strategies  

3.A: Write program code to create objects of a class and call methods.  

Write program code to:  

create objects using constructors with and without parameters. § call methods and overloaded methods.  

When writing program code that contains multiple interacting classes, students will need to be sure that they are using the right methods for each object type.  

# Modeling  

When teaching how to create objects, model the correct way to declare a reference type variable, and then initialize it with a call to a constructor. This helps students begin to recognize the parts of the statement that change, such as the class name and parameter list, and what remains the same, such as the new keyword and the statement structure.  

# Additional Activities  

§ Marking the text Sharing and responding  

# 3.B: Write program code to define a new type by creating a class.  

Write program code to:  

§ declare a class through a class header without inheritance.   
§ create classes with primitive and reference instance variables.   
§ define methods with and without return values and/or parameters.   
§ create classes in an inheritance hierarchy.  

When creating subclasses, parent objects must exist before a child object (just like in real life), which is why the parent constructor must be called first, implicitly or explicitly.  

# Sharing and responding  

When students are   
developing their   
own class, have   
students share their   
implementation of a class with a partner to see if   
there is any expected or desired behavior missing.  

Additional Strategies § Create a plan  

# Practice 3: Code Implementation (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>Skills 3.C: Write program code to satisfy method specifications using expressions, conditional</td><td>Key Tasks Write program code: using expressions, conditional statements, oriterativestatements containing primitive</td><td>Instructional Notes Method specifications oftenrequire conditional anditerativestatementsto be nested together. If the conditionalstatementsare located inside the body of</td><td>and Strategies Note-taking When first asking studentstowritetheir own methods, have them write down descriptions of the steps needed to</td></tr><tr><td>statements, and iterative statements. 3.D: Write program code to create, traverse, and</td><td>and referencevalues. using combinations of interacting expressions. conditional statements, and iterative statements. to implement modifications of standard algorithms thatuse conditionals oriterativestatements. Write program code that:</td><td>theiterative statements, theconditionswillbe checked as many times as thestatementexecutes. When writing programs to traverse and manipulate</td><td>define a method so that theycanreferto a record of the process atalater point in time. Additional Strategies ·Pair programming Unplugged activities Before introducing</td></tr><tr><td>manipulate elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects.</td><td>creates,traverses, parallel traverses,and utilizes or manipulates the elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects. 1traverses1Darrayor ArrayList objects in anorderotherthan from left to right. implements standard algorithms using 1D array or ArrayList objects.</td><td>arrays, it is important for students to remember that arrays have no remove method.Itemremoval can be mimicked by setting locationstoadefaultvalue or shifting elements within the array tokeep empty or availablelocationsattheend. On the otherhand, when itemsareaddedorremoved in an ArrayList,items are automatically shifted to makeroom orremove empty spaces.</td><td>searching algorithms, have students attempt to search for a specific item among a large group of unsorted items,making note of their process and also the time that it takes. Thenhave themsearch for an item in a large group of sorted items andnotethedifferencein process and time taken. Additional Strategies ·Identify a subtask</td></tr></table></body></html>  

One problem that many students have is forgetting to create the array or ArrayList when it is has been declared as an instance variable in a class declaration. It is not enough to declare the instance variable; the array or ArrayList needs to be created in the constructor.  

# Practice 3: Code Implementation (cont’d)  

#  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Skills</td><td>Key Tasks</td><td>Instructional Notes</td><td>Sample Acti and Strategi</td></tr><tr><td>E:Write program code create, traverse, and anipulate elements in D array objects.</td><td>Writeprogramcodethat: creates,traverses, paralleltraverses,and utilizes ormanipulates theelements in2D array objects. traverses2Darray objectsinanorder other than row-major. implements standard</td><td>When writing program code thatuses2D arrays, studentsoftenforgethow toaccesselements.Itis importanttostressthat2D arrayaccessuses[row] [col] and not (row, col). Studentsalsoneedto understand that 2Darrays are arrays of arrays. Using nested enhanced for</td><td>Jigsaw Askstudentstof groups of four ar come up with a w traversing a2Da other than row-m order.Once they theirpattern,ask develop andimp</td></tr></table></body></html>  

new groups comprised of of the former groups to present their pattern and program code for the traversal.  

# Additional Strategies  

§ Activating prior knowledge Using manipulatives  

# Practice 4: Code Testing  

# Skills  

# Key Tasks Instructional Notes  

# Sample Activities and Strategies  

4.A: Use test-cases to find errors or validate results.  

Given program code, § develop a set of test cases that can be used to validate results or highlight errors. § determine what can be verified by a given set of test cases.  

When trying to find errors or validate results in program code that contains Boolean expressions, truth tables can be especially helpful. One error that students often encounter—and can be difficult to catch, because the code will still compile—is using a single $=$ in a Boolean expression. Although the code will compile, it will not work as expected.  

# Code tracing  

Students can check whether they have been given correct output for a given method by tracing their code with input values that are around the extreme ranges of the input values.  

# Additional Strategies  

Sharing and responding  

# Practice 4: Code Testing (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Skills</td><td>Key Tasks</td><td>Instructional Notes</td><td>Sample Activities and Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>4.B: Identify errors in program code.</td><td>Given program code, identify compile-time and run-time errors.</td><td>A common error is trying to accessorusevariableswhen they do not exist. Local variables areonly accessibleintheblock in which they are declared. Students need to remember that theycannotuselocal variables in other methodsor outsideof the blockinwhichthosevariables are declared (such as a loop). Another common erroris confusion between array and ArrayList access.This includes confusion of [] with get(), as well as confusionbetween .length and .size()</td><td>Predict and compare When students begin to write methods, provide them with the specifications for severalmethodsand a collectionofmethod headers. Have them select which method header belongs with whichspecification, and then have them implement each method. Additional Strategies ·Error analysis</td></tr><tr><td>4.C: Determine if two or more code segments yield equivalent results.</td><td>Giventwo ormore program code segments, typically if statements, loops, or array/ArrayList traversals, compare and contrastto determine if they yield the same results.</td><td>Whenstudents arecomparing and contrasting code segments, it can be helpful to provide them with code thatuses an array and askthemtorewriteitusing an ArrayList. This same type of activity canbe done using while and for loops, or nested and non-nestedstatements.</td><td>Think-pair-share Ask students to consider two program codesegmentsthatare meanttoyield the same result.Have them take a few minutes to think independently about the benefits of one segment over the other.Then,ask students to compare and addtothislistwith their partner and finally tosharewiththewhole group.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Practice 5: Documentation  

# Skills  

# Key Tasks Instructional Notes  

# Sample Activities and Strategies  

5.A: Describe the behavior of a given segment of program code.  

Given program code, describe the general behavior that might be included in program documentation.  

When looking at program code that contains loops, students need to know that “If loops” do not exist. Code that executes one time should be contained within an if statement. Code that may need to repeat should be contained within the body of a loop.  

# Paraphrase  

When covering nested conditionals and compound Boolean expressions, provide different code segments to students. Have them paraphrase what is happening in the code, as opposed to just explaining each line or expression individually. Then, have them pair up with students whose code accomplishes the same task in a different manner.  

# Additional Strategies  

§§ Look for a pattern Sharing and responding  

5.B: Explain why a code segment will not compile or work as intended.  

Given program code without example test cases, determine why it might not compile or, if it would compile, why it won’t work as intended. This goes beyond finding the error and involves explaining the consequences of having the error in the program.  

When trying to determine why a code segment will not work as intended, there are several things that should be examined. If return statements are included inside both the if and else clauses within a loop, an early return is ensured.  

It is also important for students to understand that constructors do not have a return type, and it should be emphasized that constructors are not methods.  

# Think aloud  

When determining why a particular method fails to provide the correct output, students should ask themselves a series of questions out loud to identify potential locations of errors, such as parameter mismatch, incorrect Boolean expressions or loop bounds, or incorrect order of expressions.  

Additional Strategies Quickwrite  

continued on next page  

# Practice 5: Documentation (cont’d)  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Skills 5.C: Explain how the</td><td>Key Tasks</td><td>Instructional Notes Since there are many</td><td>Sample Activities and Strategies</td></tr><tr><td>result of program code changes, given a change to the initial code.</td><td>Given programcode and a proposed change, explain howitwillaffecttheresult of execution.</td><td>waysto write a program to accomplishthesametask,it is helpful for students to be exposed tomanydifferent ways towrite a solution.This allowsthemtoseethatwhile their own solution may be different from another, it may still be correct.</td><td>Discussion group When looking at how the outcome of program code can change given a changetoinitialcode, provide students with examplesofstatic variables (unique identification numbers, thenumber of objects created,etc.) to help distinguish between static and instance variables.</td></tr><tr><td>5.D: Describe the initial conditions that must be met for a program segment to work as intended or described.</td><td>Given program code, describe the initial conditions stated explicitly in thepreconditions of the program documentation or implicitly required based on the methods being called in the code segment.</td><td>The methods and classes presented in free-response questions contain both pre-and postconditions that providevaluableinformation about what needs to be true priortoexecuting methods andwhattheoutcomewill be when using these methods. While the compilerignores these comments, students should not, as they provide valuable insight into how the program code is written.</td><td>Additional Strategies Jigsaw Marking the text Provide students witha completeclass implementation with associated Java documentation, and have them circle the pre- and postconditions for each method. AdditionalStrategies Asktheexpert</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Using an Iterative Development Process  

The instructional strategies tables include strategies that facilitate students’ use of a process to plan and create computer programs. Planning processes are iterative and cyclical in nature and require students to reflect on what they have created. If necessary, students should return to prior stages to modify their plans and change their development. This iterative process of development and revision allows students to have more confidence in their solution and in their ability to develop solutions. Allowing students to revise and improve on previous work is also another way to provide feedback and can be used as a method of formative assessment throughout the course.  

Several of the computational thinking practices for this course represent phases that can be seen in a development process to plan and create computer programs. Throughout any design process, students should collaborate when developing a program.  

§§ Program Design and Algorithm Development: In this phase, students create a representation or model of their solution. Strategies such as diagramming and using manipulatives can give students confidence in the design of their solution.  

§ Code Implementation: In this phase, students implement their solution by writing a program. The strategy of pair programming allows students to have constant support during implementation. To successfully implement a program, students need to understand the operators and program execution order needed to produce the desired results.  

§§ Code Testing: In this phase, students evaluate and test the solution they implemented. Teachers can use strategies such as predict and compare and error analysis to determine whether the solution is appropriate. This phase may require students to revisit earlier phases of development to make improvements on their solution.  

§§ Documentation: In this phase, students describe what the program does, often adding comments to program code. Students could keep a journal or log book to note design decisions and rationales. This allows students to come back to a program later and recall how it was constructed. This is helpful when modifications need to be made to an existing program, either by the student who wrote the initial version or by another student. Strategies such as note-taking or paraphrasing can help students document their process at different stages.  

The phases listed above need not be implemented in linear order. Students may choose to return to earlier phases as their design ideas change and develop.  

# Teaching the Big Ideas  

As demonstrated in the unit guides and topic pages, the big ideas spiral throughout the course. When teaching the big ideas and building conceptual understanding, it is important to give students scaffolded practice with various components of the big ideas. Below are some of the implicit elements of big ideas that should be called out and developed throughout the year.  

§ Modularity: Modularity requires students to simplify concepts and processes by looking at the big picture rather than the details and developing abstractions. Whether this is in the representation of objects or concepts, in the use of preexisting processes, or in the creation and organization of code into different methods or classes. There are several instructional strategies that can help students make these connections, including using manipulatives and diagramming.  

§ Variables: Utilizing variables to help simplify concepts and processes is an important component of this big idea and involves the creation of data abstractions. In order to help students see the role that variables play in generalizable solutions, try the instructional strategies of creating a plan and identifying a subtask. These strategies can also be used to show how variables manage  

large amounts of data or complex relationships. In addition, when attempting to define or interpret processes and the role that variables play in those processes, strategies of kinesthetic learning and look for a pattern are helpful.  

Control: Being able to write and evaluate mathematical expressions is a necessary component in determining the computed result of an expression. Code tracing, error analysis, and simplify the problem are strategies that can help students understand the relationship between variables and quantities and provide them opportunities to practice writing and evaluating mathematical expressions. Other strategies like pair programming and predict and compare provide students with practice developing algorithmic thinking, such as defining and interpreting processes that are used in a program, like selection and iteration.  

Impact of Computing: Strategies such as discussion group, jigsaw, and think aloud provide students opportunities to explain the cause and effect of a program. These opportunities can help distinguish a program’s intended purpose from unintended consequences.  

# Using Strategies for Collaboration  

Effective collaboration has been shown to have significant positive impacts on students; however, this does not simply mean having students work in groups. Using appropriate strategies and creating a collaborative environment in the classroom—one that places a strong emphasis on valuing and discussing contributions of ideas from all group members—helps student engagement and confidence and encourages participation from a wider population of students. Students should be given many opportunities to practice collaboration throughout the course, especiall as they consider different collaborative methods that will help improve their programs using an iterative development process.  

Some effective ways to incorporate collaboration in the classroom and during the development of programs include the following:  

§ Have an established protocol for students to equally participate and share their ideas, such as the think-pair-share strategy. This strategy builds students’ confidence and can create a successful collaborative learning community within a classroom. § Provide students with opportunities to work together to solve problems. River-crossing problems and critical thinking problem-solving questions can be solved collaboratively.  

Brainstorm ideas and solutions in a team environment.  

Work together to design subtasks of a larger project, develop those subtasks, and integrate them in the completion of the project.  

Implement a solution together using pair programming. One student (the driver) writes program code, while the other student (the observer, pointer, or navigator) reviews each line of program code as it is typed in. The partners change roles after designated time intervals. For multiday projects, teachers can have students rotate every 20–30 minutes. Smaller programming projects can be used as warm-up problems where students rotate roles after each problem. § Have students provide feedback to each other on a program at various points in the development process to improve the overall quality. § Have students provide technical support to each other when working to solve a problem on their own.  

# Using Real-World Data  

Data and information are very important in the field of computer science. Many of our computer systems are heavily reliant on the collection and use of data to determine important information or new knowledge. Data is what makes simulations more robust; for example, it is what ensures that you get appropriate suggestions based on your viewing preferences when streaming content, and it is what helps you navigate through many of the apps on today’s technological devices. As students learn about data and how it can be used, their understanding can help them see the connection between computer science and other careers and fields of study. One of the best ways for students to learn about and interact with data, while also reinforcing the concepts in the course, is to use real-world data to solve a problem of interest. This can include the following steps:  

§ In discussion groups, or using online tools for collaboration, have students read about and examine possible sources of data in various fields, such as medicine, business, criminal justice, marketing, civil engineering, and municipal planning.   
§ Have students generate and pose questions about a set of data and use sharing and responding to refine those questions.   
Use pair programming to have students develop a program to process information from a large, realworld data set.  

# Using Input  

Although this course does not prescribe or test an approach for getting data into a program through specific learning objectives focused on input, input is a necessary component for any computer programming course. There are several ways to accomplish input, such as the Scanner class or JOptionPane, and teachers should use an approach that fits their style, textbook, or other materials in use. Input is essential for the creation of interesting and engaging programs and should therefore play an important role in the programming practice that takes place throughout the year.  

Several of the labs for AP Computer Science A include the opportunity to bring in real-world data, and the more that data can be used as part of everyday practice, the more comfortable students will become. By showing students how to solve problems and answer questions using real-world data sets, we are reinforcing the power of computer science and its applications to other disciplines.  

There are a variety of ways to bring in data, and it is not necessary for students to write this code themselves. Providing students with starter code that can be used to read or process data can allow for richer programming exercises, and examples of this type of started code can be found on the online teacher community.  

AP COMPUTER SCIENCE A  

# Exam Information  

# Exam Overview  

The AP Computer Science A Exam assesses student understanding of the computational thinking practices and learning objectives outlined in the course framework. The exam is 3 hours long and includes 40 multiple-choice questions and 4 free-response questions. As part of the exam, students will be given the Java Quick Reference (see Appendix), which lists accessible methods from the Java library that may be included in the exam. The details of the exam, including exam weighting and timing, can be found below:  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Section</td><td>Question Type</td><td>Number of Questions</td><td>Exam Weighting</td><td>Timing</td></tr><tr><td>I</td><td>Multiple-choice questions</td><td>40</td><td>50%</td><td>90 minutes</td></tr><tr><td>II</td><td>Free-response questions</td><td></td><td></td><td>90 minutes</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4"></td><td>Question 1: Methods and Control Structures (9 points)</td><td></td><td>12.5%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Question 2: Class (9 points)</td><td></td><td>12.5%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Question 3: Array/ArrayList (9 points)</td><td></td><td>12.5%</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Question 4: 2D Array (9 points)</td><td></td><td>12.5%</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td>The exam assesses content from the three big ideas for the course:</td></tr><tr><td>Big Idea 1: Modularity</td></tr><tr><td>Big Idea 2:Variables</td></tr><tr><td>Big Idea 3: Control</td></tr></table></body></html>  

The AP Exam also assesses each of the 10 units of the course with the following weighting on the multiple-choice section:   


<html><body><table><tr><td>Units Exam Weighting</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 1: Primitive Types 2.5-5%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 2: Using Objects 5-7.5%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 3: Boolean Expressions and if Statements 15-17.5%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 4: Iteration 17.5-22.5%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 5: Writing Classes 5-7.5%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 6: Array 10-15%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 7: ArrayList 2.5-7.5%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 8: 2D Array 7.5-10%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 9: Inheritance 5-10%</td></tr><tr><td>Unit 10: Recursion 5-7.5%</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# How Student Learning Is Assessed on the AP Exam  

The AP Computer Science A computational thinking practices are assessed on the AP Exam as detailed below.  

# Section I: Multiple-Choice  

The AP Computer Science A Exam multiple-choice section includes mostly individual questions, with one or two sets of multiple questions (typically two to three questions per set).  

Computational Thinking Practices 1, 2, 4, and 5 are all assessed in in the multiple-choice section with the following exam weighting (Computational Thinking Practice 3 is not assessed in the multiple-choice section):  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Computational Thinking Practice</td><td>Exam Weighting</td></tr><tr><td>Practice 1: Program Design and Algorithm Development</td><td>30-35%</td></tr><tr><td>Practice 2: Code Logic</td><td>40-45%</td></tr><tr><td>Practice 4: Code Testing</td><td>12-18%</td></tr><tr><td>Practice 5: Documentation</td><td>12-18%</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Section II: Free-Response  

The second section of the AP Computer Science Exam includes four free-response questions, all of which assess Computational Thinking Practice 3: Code Implementation. All five skills within this practice are assessed across the four free-response questions, with the following skill focus for each question:  

Free-response question 1: Methods and Control Structures focuses on assessing students’ ability to:  

§§ write program code to create objects of a class and call methods (Skill 3.A)   
§ write program code to satisfy method specifications using expressions, conditional statements, and iterative statements (Skill 3.C)  

Free-response question 2: Class focuses on assessing students’ ability to:  

§§ write program code to define a new type by creating a class (Skill 3.B)   
§ write program code to satisfy method specifications using expressions, conditional statements, and iterative statements (Skill 3.C)  

Free-response question 3: Array/ArrayList focuses on assessing students’ ability to:  

§ write program code to satisfy method specifications using expressions, conditional statements, and iterative statements (Skill 3.C) §§ write program code to create, traverse, and manipulate elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects (Skill 3.D)  

Free-response question 4: 2D Array focuses on assessing students’ ability to:  

§ write program code to satisfy method specifications using expressions, conditional statements, and iterative statements (Skill 3.C) §§ write program code to create, traverse, and manipulate elements in 2D array objects (Skill 3.E)  

# Task Verbs Used in Free-Response Questions  

The following task verbs are commonly used in the free-response questions:  

Assume: Suppose to be the case without any proof or need to further address the condition.  

Complete (program code): Express in print form the proper syntax to represent a described algorithm or program given part of the code.  

Implement/Write: Express in print form the proper syntax to represent a described algorithm or program.  

# Sample Exam Questions  

The sample exam questions that follow illustrate the relationship between the course framework and the AP Computer Science A Exam and serve as examples of the types of questions that appear on the exam. After the sample questions is a table that shows to which skill, learning objective(s), and unit each question relates. The table also provides the answers to the multiple-choice questions.  

# Section I: Multiple-Choice  

1. Consider the following code segment.  

int $\textsf{a}=5;$   
int $\mathbf{\Sigma}_{\mathrm{~b~}}=\mathbf{\Sigma}_{2}$ ;   
double $\textsf{c}=3.0$ ;   
System.out.println(5 + a / b \* c - l);  

What is printed when the code segment is executed?  

(A) 0.666666666666667   
(B) 9.0   
(C) 10.0   
(D) 11.5   
(E) 14.0  

2. Consider the processWords method. Assume that each of its two parameters is a String of length two or more. public void processWords(String wordl, String word2) { String str1 $=$ word1.substring(0, 2); String str2 $=$ word2.substring(word2.length() - 1); String result $=$ str2 $+$ str1; System.out.println(result.indexof(str2)); }  

Which of the following best describes the value printed when processWords is called?  

(A) The value 0 is always printed.   
(B) The value 1 is always printed.   
(C) The value result.length() - 1 is printed.   
(D) A substring containing the last character of word2 is printed.   
(E) A substring containing the last two characters of word2 is printed.  

3. Which of the following statements assigns a random integer between 25 and 60, inclusive, to rn?  

$$
\begin{array}{l l l l l l}{{\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{r}}~{\mit\mit~\Gamma}~}=\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}(\dot{\mathrm{\boldmath~int}})}}&{{(\mathrm{\boldmath~{\sf~Math}~}{\bf\cdot r a n d o m}({\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}})\mathrm{\boldmath~{\mit\star}~}25)}}&{{+}}&{{36;}}\ {{\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{r}}~{\mit\Gamma}~}=\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}(\dot{\mathrm{\boldmath~int}})}}&{{(\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{Math}~}}{\bf\cdot r a n d o m}({\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}})\mathrm{\boldmath~{\star}~}25)}}&{{+}}&{{60;}}\ {{\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{r}}~{\mit\Gamma}~}=\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}(\dot{\mathrm{\boldmath~int}})}}&{{(\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{Math}~}}{\bf\cdot r a n d o m}({\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}})\mathrm{\boldmath~{\star}~}26)}}&{{+}}&{{60;}}\ {{\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{r}}~{\mit n}~}=\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}(\dot{\mathrm{\boldmath~int}})}}&{{({\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{Math}~}}}{\bf\cdot r a n d o m}({\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}})\mathrm{\boldmath~{\star}~}36)}}&{{+}}&{{25;}}\ {{\mathrm{\boldmath~{\cal~{r}}~}{\mit n}~}=\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}(\dot{\mathrm{\boldmath~int}})}&{{({\mathrm{\boldmath~{Math}~}}{\bf\cdot r a n d o m}({\mathrm{\boldmath~\Gamma~}})\mathrm{\boldmath~{\star}~}60)}}&{{+}}&{{25;}}\end{array}
$$  

4. Vehicles are classified based on their total interior volume. The classify method is intended to return a vehicle classification String value based on total interior volume, in cubic feet, as shown in the table below.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Vehicle size class</td><td>Totalinteriorvolume</td></tr><tr><td>Minicompact</td><td>Lessthan85cubicfeet</td></tr><tr><td>Subcompact</td><td>85to99cubicfeet</td></tr><tr><td>Compact</td><td>100to109cubicfeet</td></tr><tr><td>Mid-Size</td><td>110to119cubicfeet</td></tr><tr><td>Large</td><td>120cubicfeetormore</td></tr></table></body></html>  

The classify method, which does not work as intended, is shown below   
public static String classify(int volume)   
{ String carClass $=$ ""; if (volume $>=~120$ ) { carclass $=$ "Large"; } else if (volume < 120) { carClass $=$ "Mid-Size"; } else if (volume < l10) { carclass $=$ "Compact"; } else if (volume < 100) { carClass $=$ "Subcompact";   
else   
{ carClass $=$ "Minicompact";   
}   
return carClass;  

The classify method works as intended for some but not all values of the parameter volume. For which of the following values of volume would the correct value be returned when the classify method is executed?  

(A) 80  
(B) 90  
(C) 105  
(D) 109  
(E) 115  

5. Which of the following best describes the value of the Boolean expression shown below?  

a && !(b || a)  

(A) The value is always true.   
(B) The value is always false.   
(C) The value is true when a has the value false, and is false otherwise.   
(D) The value is true when b has the value false, and is false otherwise.   
(E) The value is true when either a or b has the value true, and is false otherwise.  

6. Consider the following code segment.  

int val $\it{\Delta\Psi}=\it{\Delta\Psi}48\it{\Delta}$ ;   
int div $=~6$ ;   
while ( $({\mathrm{val~}}{\mathrm{~\texttt~{~\textcent~}~}}2==0)\quad\&\&{\mathrm{div~}}>0)$   
{ if (val % div == 0) $\{$ System.out.print(val + " "); } val /= 2; div--;   
}  

What is printed when the code segment is executed?  

(A) 48 12 6  
(B) 48 12 6 3  
(C) 48 12 6 3 1  
(D) 48 24 12 6  
(E) 48 24 12 6 3  

7. Consider the following class definition. public class Example { private int x; / / Constructor not shown. }  

Which of the following is a correct header for a method of the Example class that would return the value of the private instance variable $\mathbf{x}$ so that it can be used in a class other than Example?  

(A) private int getX() (B) private void getX() (C) public int getX() (D) public void getX() (E) public void getX(int x)  

8. In the following code segment, assume that the string str has been properly declared and initialized. The code segment is intended to print the number of strings in the array animals that have str as a substring. String[] animals $=$ {"horse"， "cow", "goat", "dog", "cat", "mouse"}; int count $\mathit{\Theta}=\mathit{\Theta}0:$ for (int $\underline{{\textbf{i}}}=~0$ ;i $<=$ animals.length; $\dot{{\tt1}}++$ ) { if (animals[i].indexof(str) $>=~0$ ) { count++; } } System.out.println(count);  

Which of the following changes should be made so the code segment works as intended?  

(A) The Boolean expression in the for loop header should be changed to i $<$ animals.length.   
(B)	 The Boolean expression in the for loop header should be changed to i < animals.length -1.   
(C) The Boolean expression in the for loop header should be changed to i $<$ animals[i].length.   
(D)	The condition in the if statement should be changed to animals[i].equals(str).   
(E) The condition in the if statement should be changed to animals[i].substring(str).  

9.	 Consider an integer array, nums, which has been declared and initialized with one or more integer values. Which of the following code segments updates nums so that each element contains the square of its original value?  

I. int $\mathrm{~\boldmath~k~}=\mathrm{~\boldmath~0~};$ while( $\textbf{k}<$ nums.length) { nums[k] = nums[k] \* nums[k]; >  

II. for (int $\mathrm{~\bf~k~}=\mathrm{~\bf~0~}$ ; k < nums.length; $\kappa{+}+$ ) { nums[k] = nums[k] \* nums[k]; $\}$  

III. for (int n : nums) { $\texttt{n=n}\star\texttt{n};$ } (A) II only (B) I and II only (C) I and III only (D) II and III only (E) I, II, and III  

10. Consider the following code segment.  

ArrayList<String> numbers $=$ new ArrayList<String>();   
numbers.add("one");   
numbers.add("two");   
numbers.add(o, "three");   
numbers.set(2, "four");   
numbers.add("five");   
numbers.remove(1);  

Which of the following represents the contents of numbers after the code segment has been executed?  

(A) ["one", "four", "five"]   
(B) ["three", "two", "five"]   
(C) ["three", "four", "two"]   
(D) ["three", "four", "five"]   
(E) ["one", "two", "three", "four", "five"]  

11. Consider the following method, which is intended to return a list containing the elements of the parameter myList with all even elements removed. public static ArrayList<Integer> removeEvens (ArrayList<Integer> myList) { for (int $\underline{{\textbf{i}}}=~0$ ;i $<$ myList.size(); $\dot{{\tt1}}++$ ) { if (myList.get(i) $82=0$ ) { myList.remove(i); } } return myList;  

Which of the following best explains why the code segment does not work as intended?  

(A) The code segment causes an IndexOutOfBoundsException for all lists because of an incorrect Boolean expression in the for loop.   
(B) The code segment causes an IndexOutOfBoundsException for lists with at least one even element because the indexes of all subsequent elements change by one when a list element is removed.   
(C) The code segment returns a list with fewer elements than intended because it fails to consider the last element of myList.   
(D) The code segment removes the wrong elements of myList because the condition in the if statement to test whether an element is even is incorrect.   
(E) The code segment skips some elements of myList because the indexes of all subsequent elements change by one when a list element is removed.  

12. Consider the following code segment.  

int[][] points $=$ $\begin{array}{r}{\left\{\begin{array}{l l l l}{\{11,}&{12,}&{13,}&{14,}&{15\},}\ {\{21,}&{22,}&{23,}&{24,}&{25\},}\end{array}\right.}\ {\left\{\begin{array}{l l l l}{31,}&{32,}&{33,}&{34,}&{35\right\},}\ {\{41,}&{42,}&{43,}&{44,}&{45\}\};}\end{array}$   
for (int row $\L=\L_{\mathrm{~0~}}$ ; row $<$ points.length; row++)   
{   
for (int col $=$ points[0].length - 1; col $>=$ row; col--)  

System.out.print(points[row][col] + " "); 了 System.out.println(); }  

What is printed when this code segment is executed?  

(A) 15 14 25 24 23 35 34 33 32 45 44 43 42 41 (B)	 15 14 13 12 25 24 23 35 34 45  

(C) 11 12 13 14 15 21 22 23 24 31 32 33 41 42  

(D)	15 14 13 12 11 25 24 23 22 35 34 33 45 44  

(E) 15 14 13 12 11   
25 24 23 22 21   
35 34 33 32 31   
45 44 43 42 41  

13. Consider the following code segment.  

$\begin{array}{r l}{\mathrm{int}[\mathbf{\Theta}][\mathbf{\Theta}]}&{\mathrm{arr}=\{\{1,\quad2,\quad3,\quad4\},}\ &{\quad\{5,\quad6,\quad7,\quad8\},}\ &{\quad\{9,\mathbf{\Phi}10,\quad11,\mathbf{\Phi}12\}\};}\end{array}$   
int $\mathtt{s u m}=0$ ;   
for (int[] x : arr)   
{ for (int $\textsf{y}=\textsf{0}$ ; y < x.length - 1; ${\tt y++}$ ) { sum += x[y]; }   
}  

What is the value of sum as a result of executing the code segment?  

(A) 36  
(B) 54  
(C) 63  
(D) 68  
(E) 78  

14. Consider the following class definitions.  

public class Thing1   
{ public void calc(int n) { n $\star=~3$ ; System.out.print(n); }   
}   
public class Thing2 extends Thing1   
{ public void calc(int n) { $\textrm{n}+=2$ ; super.calc(n); System.out.print(n); }   
} The following code segment appears in a class other than Thing1 or Thing2.   
Thingl t $=$ new Thing2();   
t.calc(2);  

What is printed as a result of executing the code segment?  

(A) 4  
(B) 6  
(C) 68  
(D) 124  
(E) 1212  

15.	 Consider the following two methods, which are intended to return the same values when they are called with the same positive integer parameter n. public static int mystery1(int n) { if $(\mathtt{n}>\mathtt{1})$ { return 5 + mystery1(n - 1); } else { return 1; } }  

public static int mystery2(int n)   
{ int total $\L=\L_{\mathrm{~0~}}$ ; int $\textbf{x}=~1$ ; while $(\tt{x}<\tt{n})$ { total $+=5.$ ; $\mathbf{x}++$ ; } return total;  

Which, if any, of the following changes to mystery2 is required so that the two methods work as intended?  

(A) The variable total should be initialized to 1.   
(B) The variable x should be initialized to 0.   
(C) The condition in the while loop header should be $\texttt{x}<\texttt{n-1}$ .   
(D) The condition in the while loop header should be $\texttt{x}<=\texttt{n}$ .   
(E) No change is required; the methods, as currently written, return the same values when they are called with the same positive integer parameter $\mathbf{n}$ .  

# Section II: Free-Response  

The following are examples of the kinds of free-response questions found on the exam. Note that on the actual AP Exam, there will be four free-response questions.  

# Methods and Control Structures (Free-Response Question 1 on the AP Exam)  

This question involves the use of check digits, which can be used to help detect if an error has occurred when a number is entered or transmitted electronically. An algorithm for computing a check digit, based on the digits of a number, is provided in part (a).  

The  CheckDigit  class is shown below. You will write two methods of the CheckDigit class.  

public class CheckDigit   
{ $/\star\star$ Returns the check digit for num, as described in part (a). $\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in num is between one and $\star$ six, inclusive. $\star$ $\mathrm{num}>=0$ $\star/$ public static int getCheck(int num) { $/\star$ to be implemented in part (a)  \* / } $/\star\star$ Returns true if numWithcheckDigit is valid, or false $\star$ otherwise, as described in part (b). $\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in numWithCheckDigit $\star$ is between two and seven, inclusive.  

\* numWithCheckDigit $>=~0$ \*/ public static boolean isValid(int numWithCheckDigit) { /\* to be implemented in part (b) \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns the number of digits in num. \*/ public static int getNumberOfDigits(int num) { $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns the nthdigit of num. $\star$ Precondition: $\mathfrak{n}>=1$ and $\begin{array}{r l}{\mathtt{n}}&{{}<=}\end{array}$ the number of digits in num $\star/$ public static int getDigit(int num, int n) { /\* implementation not shown \*/ } // There may be instance variables, constructors, and methods not shown. }  

(a) Complete the getCheck method, which computes the check digit for a number according to the following rules. § Multiply the first digit by 7, the second digit (if one exists) by 6, the third digit (if one exists) by 5, and so on. The length of the method’s int parameter is at most six; therefore, the last digit of a six-digit number will be multiplied by 2. § Add the products calculated in the previous step. § Extract the check digit, which is the rightmost digit of the sum calculated in the previous step.  

The following are examples of the check-digit calculation.  

# Example 1, where num has the value 283415  

§ The sum to calculate is $(2\times7)+(8\times6)+(3\times5)+(4\times4)+(1\times3)+(5\times2)$ $=14+48+15+16+3+10=106$ .   
· The check digit is the rightmost digit of 106, or 6, and getCheck returns the integer value 6.  

# Example 2, where num has the value 2183  

§ The sum to calculate is $(2\times7)+(1\times6)+(8\times5)+(3\times4)=14+6+40+12=72.$ § The check digit is the rightmost digit of 72, or 2, and getCheck returns the integer value 2.  

Two helper methods, getNumberOfDigits and getDigit, have been provided.  

getNumberOfDigits returns the number of digits in its int parameter. getDigit returns the nth digit of its int parameter.  

The following are examples of the use of getNumberOfDigits and getDigit.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>MethodCall</td><td>Return Value</td><td>Explanation</td></tr><tr><td>getNumberOfDigits(283415)</td><td>6</td><td>The number 283415has 6 digits.</td></tr><tr><td>getDigit(283415， 1)</td><td>2</td><td>The first digit of 283415 is 2.</td></tr><tr><td>getDigit(283415， 5)</td><td>1</td><td>The fifth digit of 283415 is 1.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Complete the getCheck method below. You must use getNumberOfDigits and getDigit appropriately to receive full credit.  

$/\star\star$ Returns the check digit for num, as described in part (a).   
$\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in num is between one and six, $\star$ inclusive. $\star$ num >= 0 \*/   
public static int getCheck(int num)  

(b) Write the isValid method. The method returns true if its parameter numWithCheckDigit, which represents a number containing a check digit, is valid, and false otherwise. The check digit is always the rightmost digit of numWithCheckDigit.  

The following table shows some examples of the use of isValid.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Method Call</td><td>Return Value</td><td>Explanation</td></tr><tr><td>getCheck(159)</td><td>2</td><td>The check digit for 159 is 2.</td></tr><tr><td>isValid(1592)</td><td>true</td><td>The number 1592is a valid combination ofa number (159) and its check digit (2).</td></tr><tr><td>isValid(1593)</td><td>false</td><td>The number 1593 is not a valid combination of a number (159) and its check digit (3) because 2 is the check digit for 159.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Complete method isValid below. Assume that getCheck works as specified, regardless of what you wrote in part (a). You must use getCheck appropriately to receive full credit.  

$/\star\star$ Returns true if numWithCheckDigit is valid, or false   
$\star$ otherwise, as described in part (b). $\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in numWithCheckDigit is $\star$ between two and seven, inclusive.  

\* numWithCheckDigit $>=~0$ \*/ public static boolean isValid(int numWithCheckDigit)  

# Array/ArrayList (Free-Response Question 3 on the AP Exam)  

The Gizmo class represents gadgets that people purchase. Some Gizmo objects are electronic and others are not. A partial definition of the Gizmo class is shown below.  

public class Gizmo   
{ $/\star\star$ Returns the name of the manufacturer of this Gizmo. \*/ public String getMaker() $\{$ $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns true if this Gizmo is electronic, and false $\star$ otherwise. $\star/$ public boolean isElectronic() $\{$ $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns true if this Gizmo is equivalent to the Gizmo $\star$ object represented by the $\star$ parameter, and false otherwise. $\star/$ public boolean equals(Object other) { $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } / / There may be instance variables, constructors, and methods not sh   
}  

The OnlinePurchaseManager class manages a sequence of Gizmo objects that an individual has purchased from an online vendor. You will write two methods of the OnlinePurchaseManager class. A partial definition of the OnlinePurchaseManager class is shown below.  

public class OnlinePurchaseManager   
{ $/\star\star$ An ArrayList of purchased Gizmo objects, $\star$ instantiated in the constructor. $\star/$ private ArrayList<Gizmo> purchases; $/\star\star$ Returns the number of purchased Gizmo objects that are electronic $\star$ whose manufacturer is maker, as described in part (a). \*/  

public int countElectronicsByMaker(String maker) $\{$ $/\star$ to be implemented in part (a) \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns true if any pair of adjacent purchased Gizmo objects are $\star$ \* equivalent, and false otherwise, as described in part (b). $\star/$ public boolean hasAdjacentEqualPair() { $/\star$ to be implemented in part (b) \*/ } // There may be instance variables, constructors, and methods not shown. }  

(a) Write the countElectronicsByMaker method. The method examines the ArrayList instance variable purchases to determine how many Gizmo objects purchased are electronic and are manufactured by maker.  

Assume that the OnlinePurchaseManager object opm has been declared and initialized so that the ArrayList purchases contains Gizmo objects as represented in the following table.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Index in purchases</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Valuereturned by method call isElectronic()</td><td>true</td><td>false</td><td>true</td><td>false</td><td>true</td><td>false</td></tr><tr><td>Valuereturned by method call getMaker()</td><td>ABC</td><td>ABC</td><td>XYZ</td><td>1mnop</td><td>ABC</td><td>ABC</td></tr></table></body></html>  

The following table shows the value returned by some calls to countElectronicsByMaker.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>MethodCall</td><td>ReturnValue</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("ABC")</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("lmnop")</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("QRP")</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Complete method countElectronicsByMaker below.  

$/\star\star$ Returns the number of purchased Gizmo objects that are electronic and $\star$ whose manufacturer is maker, as described in part (a). \*/ public int countElectronicsByMaker(String maker)  

(b) When purchasing items online, users occasionally purchase two identical items in rapid succession without intending to do so (e.g., by clicking a purchase button twice). A vendor may want to check a user’s purchase history to detect such occurrences and request confirmation.  

Write the hasAdjacentEqualPair method. The method detects whether two adjacent Gizmo objects in purchases are equivalent, using the equals method of the Gizmo class. If an adjacent equivalent pair is found, the hasAdjacentEqualPair method returns true. If no such pair is found, or if purchases has fewer than two elements, the method returns false.  

Complete method hasAdjacentEqualPair below.   
$/\star\star$ Returns true if any pair of adjacent purchased Gizmo objects are $\star$ equivalent, and false otherwise, as described in part (b). $\star/$   
public boolean hasAdjacentEqualPair()  

# Answer Key and Question Alignment to Course Framework  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Multiple-Choice Question</td><td>Answer</td><td>Skill</td><td>Learning Objective</td><td>Unit</td></tr><tr><td>L</td><td>C</td><td>2.A</td><td>CON-1.A</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>A</td><td>5.A</td><td>VAR-1.E.b</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>D</td><td>1.C</td><td>CON-1.D</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>E</td><td>4.A</td><td>CON-2.A</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>B</td><td>5.A</td><td>CON-1.G</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>A</td><td>2.B</td><td>CON-2.C</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>C</td><td>1.C</td><td>MOD-2.D</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>A</td><td>4.B</td><td>VAR-2.B</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>A</td><td>1.B</td><td>VAR-2.C</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>D</td><td>2.C</td><td>VAR-2.D</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>E</td><td>5.B</td><td>VAR-2.E</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>D</td><td>2.B</td><td>VAR-2.G.a</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>B</td><td>2.B</td><td>VAR-2.G.b</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>D</td><td>2.C</td><td>MOD-3.B</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>A</td><td>4.C</td><td>CON-2.0</td><td>10</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Free-Response Question</td><td>QuestionType</td><td>Skill</td><td>Learning Objective</td><td>Unit</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Methods and Control Structures</td><td>3.A,3.C</td><td>MOD-1.H, CON-1.A, CON-1.E CON-2.ACON-2.E</td><td>1,2,3,4,5</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Array / ArrayList</td><td>3.A,3.C,3.D</td><td>MOD-1.G, CON-1.B, CON-1.H, CON-2.C,CON-2.J.b,VAR-1.E.b, VAR-2.D,VAR-2.E</td><td>1,2,3,4,5,7</td></tr></table></body></html>  

The scoring information for the questions within this course and exam description, along with further exam resources, can be found on the AP Computer Science A Exam Page on AP Central.  

# Question 1: Methods and Control Structures  

This question involves the use of check digits, which can be used to help detect if an error has occurred when a number is entered or transmitted electronically. An algorithm for computing a check digit, based on the digits of a number, is provided in part (a).  

The CheckDigit class is shown below. You will write two methods of the CheckDigit class.  

ablic class CheckDigit $/\star\star$ Returns the check digit for num, as described in part (a). $\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in num is between one and $\star$ six, inclusive. $\star$ $\mathrm{num}>=0$ $\star/$ public static int getCheck(int num) { $/\star$ to be implemented in part (a) \*/ $\}$   
$/\star\star$ Returns true if numWithCheckDigit is valid, or false $\star$ otherwise, as described in part (b). $\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in numWithCheckDigit $\star$ is between two and seven, inclusive. $\star$ numWithCheckDigit $>=~0$ $\star/$   
public static boolean isValid(int numWithCheckDigit) $\{$ $/\star$ to be implemented in part (b) \*/   
}   
$/\star\star$ Returns the number of digits in num. \* /   
public static int getNumberOfDigits(int num)   
$\{$ $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/   
}   
$/\star\star$ Returns the nthdigit of num. $\star$ Precondition: $\mathfrak{n}>=~1$ and $\begin{array}{r l}{\mathfrak{n}}&{{}<=}\end{array}$ the number of digits in num $\star/$   
public static int getDigit(int num, int n) $\{$ $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/   
} // There may be instance variables, constructors, and methods not shown.  

(a) Complete the getCheck method, which computes the check digit for a number according to the following rules.  

§ Multiply the first digit by 7, the second digit (if one exists) by 6, the third digit (if one exists) by 5, and so on. The length of the method’s int parameter is at most six; therefore, the last digit of a six-digit number will be multiplied by 2.   
§ Add the products calculated in the previous step.   
Extract the check digit, which is the rightmost digit of the sum calculated in the previous step.  

The following are examples of the check-digit calculation.  

# Example 1, where num has the value 283415  

■ The sum to calculate is $(2\times7)+(8\times6)+(3\times5)+(4\times4)+(1\times3)+(5\times2)=14+48+15+16+3+10=106.$ § The check digit is the rightmost digit of 106, or 6, and getCheck returns the integer value 6.  

Example 2, where num has the value 2183  

§ The sum to calculate is $(2\times7)+(1\times6)+(8\times5)+(3\times4)=14+6+40+12=72.$ § The check digit is the rightmost digit of 72, or 2, and getCheck returns the integer value  

Two helper methods, getNumberOfDigits and getDigit, have been provided.  

getNumberOfDigits returns the number of digits in its int parameter.   
getDigit returns the nth digit of its int parameter.  

The following are examples of the use of getNumberOfDigits and getDigit.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>MethodCall</td><td>Return Value</td><td>Explanation</td></tr><tr><td>getNumberOfDigits(283415)</td><td>6</td><td>The number 283415 has 6 digits.</td></tr><tr><td>getDigit(283415， 1)</td><td>2</td><td>The first digit of 283415 is 2.</td></tr><tr><td>getDigit(283415， 5)</td><td>1</td><td>Thefifth digit of 283415 is 1.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Complete the getCheck method below. You must use getNumberOfDigits and getDigit appropriately to receive full credit.  

$/\star\star$ Returns the check digit for num, as described in part (a).   
$\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in num is between one and six, $\star$ inclusive.   
$\star$ num >= 0   
$\star/$   
public static int getCheck(int num)  

(b) Write the isValid method. The method returns true if its parameter numWithCheckDigit, which represents a number containing a check digit, is valid, and false otherwise. The check digit is always the rightmost digit of numWithCheckDigit.  

The following table shows some examples of the use of isValid.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Method Call</td><td>Return Value</td><td>Explanation</td></tr><tr><td>getCheck(159)</td><td>2</td><td>The check digit for 159 is 2.</td></tr><tr><td>isValid(1592)</td><td>true</td><td>Thenumber1592is avalidcombinationofa number (159) and its check digit (2).</td></tr><tr><td>isValid(1593)</td><td>false</td><td>Thenumber1593isnotavalidcombinationofa number (159) and its check digit (3) because 2 is the check digit for 159.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Complete method isValid below. Assume that getCheck works as specified, regardless of what you wrote in part (a). You must use getCheck appropriately to receive full credit.  

$/\star\star$ Returns true if numWithCheckDigit is valid, or false $\star$ otherwise, as described in part (b).   
$\star$ Precondition: The number of digits in numWithCheckDigit is \* between two and seven, inclusive.   
$\star$ numWithCheckDigit $>=~0$   
$\star/$   
public static boolean isValid(int numWithCheckDigit)  

# Applying the Scoring Criteria  

Apply the question scoring criteria first, which always takes precedence. Penalty points can only be deducted in a part of the question that has earned credit via the question rubric. No part of a question (a, b, c) may have a negative point total. A given penalty can be assessed only once for a question, even if it occurs multiple times or in multiple parts of that question. A maximum of 3 penalty points may be assessed per question.  

# 1-Point Penalty  

v)  Array/collection access confusion ([] get)   
w) Extraneous code that causes side-effect (e.g., printing to output, incorrect precondition check)   
x) Local variables used but none declared   
y) Destruction of persistent data (e.g., changing value referenced by parameter)   
z) Void method or constructor that returns a value  

# No Penalty  

Extraneous code with no side-effect (e.g., valid precondition check, no-op) Spelling/case discrepancies where there is no ambiguity\* Local variable not declared provided other variables are declared in some part private or public qualifier on a local variable Missing public qualifier on class or constructor header Keyword used as an identifier Common mathematical symbols used for operators $(\textsf{x}\bullet\doteq<>\textsf{c}>\neq)$ []vs.（）vs.<> $=$ instead of $==$ and vice versa length/size confusion for array, String, List, or ArrayList; with or without ( ) Extraneous [ ] when referencing entire array [i,j] instead of [i][j] Extraneous size in array declaration, e.g., int[size] nums $=$ new int[size]; Missing ; where structure clearly conveys intent Missing $\left\{\begin{array}{r l}\end{array}\right\}$ where indentation clearly conveys intent Missing ( ) on parameter-less method or constructor invocations Missing ( ) around if or while conditions  

\*Spelling and case discrepancies for identifiers fall under the “No Penalty” category only if the correction can be unambiguously inferred from context, for example, “ArayList” instead of “ArrayList”. As a counterexample, note that if the code declares “int $\textsf{G}=99$ , $\mathfrak{g}~=~0;^{\prime\prime}$ , then uses “while ( $\mathrm{~\textit~{~G~}~}<\mathrm{~1~}0\mathrm{~)~}^{\prime\prime}$ instead of “while $\mathrm{~\boldmath~\chi~}\textbf{<}10\mathrm{~\boldmath~\chi~}^{\prime\prime}$ , the context does not allow for the reader to assume the use of the lower case variable.  

# Canonical solution  

(a) public static int getCheck(int num) 4 points { int $\mathtt{s u m}=0$ ; for (int $\mathrm{~\small~\displaystyle~\underline{~}{~\partial~\psi~}~}=~1\mathrm{~\small~\displaystyle~\underline{~}{~\partial~\psi~}~}$ ; i $<=$ getNumberOfDigits(num); $\dot{{\bf x}}++$ ) { sum $+=$ (8 - i) \* getDigit(num, i); } return sum % 10; }   
(b) public static boolean isValid(int numWithCheckDigit) 5 points { int check $=$ numWithCheckDigit % 10; int num $=$ numWithCheckDigit / 10; int newCheck $=$ getCheck(num); if (check $==$ newCheck) { return true; } else { return false; }  

(a) getCheck  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Scoring Criteria Decision Rules</td></tr><tr><td>1CallsgetNumberOfDigitsandgetDigit</td><td></td><td>1 point 3.A</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2Calculatesonepartial sum</td><td>MOD-1.H Responsesearn thepoint if they... 1 point Calculatethesuminsideoroutsidethecontext of a loop.</td></tr><tr><td>3 3Calculatesallpartialsums(inthecontextofaloop, noboundserrors)</td><td></td><td>CON-1.A Responses earn the point if they... 1 point Use eithera for or whileloop. 3.C</td></tr><tr><td>4Returnsthelastdigitofthecalculatedsum as the</td><td>Responses still earn the point even if they..</td><td>CON-2.E 1 point</td></tr><tr><td>check digit</td><td>Calculate thesum incorrectly.</td><td>3.C</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# (b) isValid  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Scoring Criteria Decision Rules</td></tr><tr><td>5Obtains check digitof numWithCheckDigit</td><td></td><td>1 point 3.C CON-1.A</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>6 Obtains number remaining in numWithCheckDigit aftercheckdigitremoved</td><td>1 point 3.C CON-1.A</td></tr><tr><td>7Calls getCheck on number without check digit</td><td></td><td>1 point 3.A MOD-1.H</td></tr><tr><td>returnvaluefromgetcheck</td><td>8Compares check digit of numWithCheckDigit and</td><td>Responses still earn the point even if they.. 1 point Calculated check digit incorrectly; or Calculated number without check digit CON-1.E incorrectly.</td></tr><tr><td>Returnstrueorfalsedependingontheresultof the 9 previous comparison</td><td>Responses still earn the point even if they... Donotusean if statement</td><td>1 point 3.C CON-2.A</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total for part (b)</td><td>5 points</td></tr><tr><td>Questionspecificpenalties</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>None</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

The Gizmo class represents gadgets that people purchase. Some Gizmo objects are electronic and others are not. A partial definition of the Gi zmo class is shown below.  

public class Gizmo   
{ $/\star\star$ Returns the name of the manufacturer of this Gizmo. \*/ public String getMaker() { $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns true if this Gizmo is electronic, and false $\star$ otherwise. \*/ public boolean isElectronic() { $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } $/\star\star$ Returns true if this Gizmo is equivalent to the Gizmo \* object represented by the $\star$ parameter, and false otherwise. $\star/$ public boolean equals(Object other) { $/\star$ implementation not shown \*/ } / / There may be instance variables, constructors, and methods not s   
}  

The OnlinePurchaseManager class manages a sequence of Gizmo objects that an individual has purchased from an online vendor. You will write two methods of the OnlinePurchaseManager class. A partial definition of the OnlinePurchaseManager class is shown below.  

public class OnlinePurchaseManager   
{ $/\star\star$ An ArrayList of purchased Gizmo objects, $\star$ instantiated in the constructor. $\star/$ private ArrayList<Gizmo> purchases; $/\star\star$ Returns the number of purchased Gizmo objects that are electronic $\star$ whose manufacturer is maker, as described in part (a). $\star/$ public int countElectronicsByMaker(String maker) { $/\star$ to be implemented in part (a) \*/ }  

$/\star\star$ Returns true if any pair of adjacent purchased Gizmo objects are \* equivalent, and false otherwise, as described in part (b). $\star/$ public boolean hasAdjacentEqualPair() { $/\star$ to be implemented in part (b) \*/ } // There may be instance variables, constructors, and methods not shown. }  

(a) Write the countElectronicsByMaker method. The method examines the ArrayList instance variable purchases to determine how many Gizmo objects purchased are electronic and are manufactured by maker.  

Assume that the OnlinePurchaseManager object opm has been declared and initialized so that the ArrayList purchases contains Gizmo objects as represented in the following table.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Index in purchases</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Valuereturned by method call isElectronic()</td><td>true</td><td>false</td><td>true</td><td>false</td><td>true</td><td>false</td></tr><tr><td>Valuereturned by method call getMaker()</td><td>ABC</td><td>ABC</td><td>XYZ</td><td>1mnop</td><td>ABC</td><td>ABC</td></tr></table></body></html>  

The following table shows the value returned by some calls to countElectronicsByMaker.  

<html><body><table><tr><td>MethodCall</td><td>Return Value</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("ABC")</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("lmnop")</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("xYz")</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>opm.countElectronicsByMaker("QRP")</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Complete method countElectronicsByMaker below.  

$/\star\star$ Returns the number of purchased Gizmo objects that are electronic and $\star$ whose manufacturer is maker, as described in part (a). $\star/$ public int countElectronicsByMaker(String maker)  

(b)	 When purchasing items online, users occasionally purchase two identical items in rapid succession without intending to do so (e.g., by clicking a purchase button twice). A vendor may want to check a user’s purchase history to detect such occurrences and request confirmation.  

Write the hasAdjacentEqualPair method. The method detects whether two adjacent Gizmo objects in purchases are equivalent, using the equals method of the Gizmo class. If an adjacent equivalent pair is found, the hasAdjacentEqualPair method returns true. If no such pair is found, or if purchases has fewer than two elements, the method returns false.  

Complete method hasAdjacentEqualPair below.  

$/\star\star$ Returns true if any pair of adjacent purchased Gizmo objects are \* equivalent, and false otherwise, as described in part (b).   
$\star/$   
public boolean hasAdjacentEqualPair()  

# Canonical solution  

public int countElectronicsByMarker(String maker) 4 points { int result $\L=\L~0$ ; for (Gizmo g : purchases) { if (g.getMaker().equals(maker) && g.isElectronic()) { result++; } } return result; } (b) public boolean hasAdjacentEqualPair() { 5 points Gizmo ${\mathfrak{g}}1=$ purchases.get(0); for (int pos $\L=\L\perp$ ; pos $<$ purchases.size(); pos++) { Gizmo ${\mathfrak{g}}2{\mathrm{~\ensuremath~{~=~}~}}$ purchases.get(0); if (g1 . equals(g2)) $\{$ return true; } ${\sf g1}={\sf g2}; $ } return false; }  

(a) countElectronicsByMaker (b) hasAdjacentEqualPair  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Scoring Criteria</td><td colspan="2">Decision Rules</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1Accessesallelementsofpurchases (noboundserrors)</td><td>Responses earn the point if they... Use a for,enhanced for,or while loop.</td><td>1 point 3.D VAR 2.E</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>CallsisElectronictotestwhetherornota Gizmo objectis electronic and getMaker to get thenameofthemanufacturerofaGizmoobject</td><td>Responses earn the point if they... Call methods on any Gizmo object, regardless of whether this is in the context of a loop.</td><td>1 point 3.A MOD-1.G</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>TestswhetherornotthemakerofaGizmoobject matches maker,using an appropriate String comparison atleastonce,inthecontextofaloop</td><td></td><td>1 point 3.C VAR-1.E.b</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Computes the number of elements that are electronic and made by maker</td><td>Responses still earn the point even if they... Donot return the number of elements that are electronic and made by maker</td><td>1 point 3.C CON-1.B</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Scoring Criteria</td><td>Decision Rules</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>5Determines whether the ArrayList contains atleast twoelements</td><td>1 point 3.D VAR-2.D</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>6Accesses all necessary elements of purchases (no bounds error)</td><td>1 point 3.D CON-2.J.b</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>7 Accesses two adjacent elements of the ArrayList in the context of a comparison</td><td>Responses still earn the point even if they... 1 point Donotaccessadjacentelementsinthe context of a loop. VAR 2.E</td></tr><tr><td>8 equivalence</td><td>3Comparestwo distinctelements of theArrayListfor</td><td>1 point 3.c CON-1.H</td></tr><tr><td>9 two elements</td><td>Returns true if at least one equivalent pair is found,and false otherwise orif the ArrayList has fewer than</td><td>Responses earn the point if they... 1 point Use aforor whileloopto access the pairs of elements. CON-2.C</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Total for part (b) 5 points</td></tr><tr><td>Question specific penalties</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>None</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

AP COMPUTER SCIENCE A  

# Appendix  

# Java Quick Reference  

Accessible methods from the Java library that may be included in the exam  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Class Constructors and Methods</td><td>Explanation</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">String Class</td></tr><tr><td>String(String str)</td><td>Constructs a new String object that represents the same sequence of characters as str</td></tr><tr><td>int length()</td><td>Returns the number of characters ina String object</td></tr><tr><td>String substring(int from, int to)</td><td>Returns the substring beginning at index from and ending at index to-1</td></tr><tr><td>String substring(int from)</td><td>Returns substring(from, length())</td></tr><tr><td>int indexOf(String str)</td><td>Returns theindexof thefirstoccurrence ofstr;returns-1if notfound</td></tr><tr><td>boolean equals(String other)</td><td>Returns true if this isequalto other; returns false otherwise</td></tr><tr><td>int compareTo(String other)</td><td>Returnsavalue<oifthisislessthanother;returns zeroifthis</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>isequaltoother;returnsavalue>oifthisis greaterthanother Integer Class</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Integer(int value)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Integer.MIN_VALUE</td><td>The minimum value represented byanintor Integer</td></tr><tr><td>Integer.MAx_VALUE</td><td>The maximum value represented by an int or Integer</td></tr><tr><td>int intValue()</td><td>Returns the value of this Integer asan int</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Double Class</td></tr><tr><td>Double(double value)</td><td>Constructs a newDouble object that represents thespecified doublevalue</td></tr><tr><td>double doubleValue()</td><td>Returns thevalueofthisDoubleasadouble</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Math Class</td></tr><tr><td>static int abs(int x)</td><td>Returns the absolutevalueofanintvalue</td></tr><tr><td>static double abs(double x)</td><td>Returnstheabsolutevalueofadoublevalue</td></tr><tr><td>static double pow(double base, double exponent)</td><td>Returns the value of the first parameter raised to the power of the second parameter</td></tr><tr><td>static double Sqrt(double x)</td><td>Returns the positive square root of a double value</td></tr><tr><td>static double random()</td><td>Returnsa double value greaterthan or equalto 0.0 and less than 1.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>ArrayList Class</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Returns the number of elements in the list</td></tr><tr><td>int size() boolean add(E obj)</td><td>Appends obj to end of list;returns true</td></tr><tr><td>void add(int index, E obj)</td><td>Inserts obj atposition index (0 <= index <= size),</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>moving elements at position index and higher to the right (adds 1 to their indices) and adds 1 to size</td></tr><tr><td>E get(int index) E set(int index， E obj)</td><td>Returns the element at positionindex in the list Replaces theelementatpositionindexwithobj:returns theelement</td></tr><tr><td>E remove(int index)</td><td>formerly at positionindex Removes element from position index, moving elements at position</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>index + 1 and higher to the left (subtracts 1 from their indices) and subtracts 1 from size; returns the element formerly at position index</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Object Class</td></tr></table></body></html>