# TOPIC 2.2 Creating and Storing Objects (Instantiation)  

SUGGESTED SKILLS  

Determine code that would be used to interact with completed program code.  

Write program code to create objects of a class and call methods.  

# Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# MOD-1  

Some objects or concepts are so frequently represented that programmers can draw upon existing code that has already been tested, enabling them to write solutions more quickly and with a greater degree of confidence.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# MOD-1.C  

# MOD-1.C.1  

Identify, using its signature, the correct constructor being called.  

A signature consists of the constructor name and the parameter list.  

# MOD-1.C.2  

The parameter list, in the header of a constructor, lists the types of the values that are passed and their variable names. These are often referred to as formal parameters.  

# MOD-1.C.3  

A parameter is a value that is passed into a constructor. These are often referred to as actual parameters.  

# MOD-1.C.4  

Constructors are said to be overloaded when there are multiple constructors with the same name but a different signature.  

# MOD-1.C.5  

The actual parameters passed to a constructor must be compatible with the types identified in the formal parameter list.  

# MOD-1.C.6  

Parameters are passed using call by value. Call by value initializes the formal parameters with copies of the actual parameters.  

# Using Objects  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# MOD-1.D  

For creating objects:  

a. Create objects by calling constructors without parameters.   
b. Create objects by calling constructors with parameters.  

# MOD-1.D.1  

Every object is created using the keyword new followed by a call to one of the class’s constructors.  

# MOD-1.D.2  

A class contains constructors that are invoked to create objects. They have the same name as the class.  

# MOD-1.D.3  

Existing classes and class libraries can be utilized as appropriate to create objects.  

# MOD-1.D.4  

Parameters allow values to be passed to the constructor to establish the initial state of the object.  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# VAR-1  

To find specific solutions to generalizable problems, programmers include variables in their code so that the same algorithm runs using different input values.  

# ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# VAR-1.D  

Define variables of the correct types to represent reference data.  

# VAR-1.D.1  

The keyword null is a special value used to indicate that a reference is not associated with any object.  

# VAR-1.D.2  

The memory associated with a variable of a reference type holds an object reference value or, if there is no object, null. This value is the memory address of the referenced object.