# TOPIC 2.7 String Methods  

# Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# VAR-1  

To find specific solutions to generalizable problems, programmers include variables in their code so that the same algorithm runs using different input values.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# VAR-1.E  

For String class: a. Create String objects. b. Call String methods.  

# VAR-1.E.6  

Application program interfaces (APIs) and libraries simplify complex programming tasks.  

# VAR-1.E.7  

Documentation for APIs and libraries are essential to understanding the attributes and behaviors of an object of a class.  

# VAR-1.E.8  

Classes in the APIs and libraries are grouped into packages.  

# VAR-1.E.9  

The String class is part of the java.lang package. Classes in the java.lang package are available by default.  

# VAR-1.E.10  

A String object has index values from 0 to length - 1. Attempting to access indices outside this range will result in an IndexOutOfBoundsException.  

# VAR-1.E.11  

A String object can be concatenated with an object reference, which implicitly calls the referenced object’s toString method.  

# Using Objects  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE  

# ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

VAR-1.E  

For String class: a. Create String objects. b. Call String methods.  

# VAR-1.E.12  

The following String methods and constructors—including what they do and when they are used—are part of the Java Quick Reference:  

§ String(String str) — Constructs a new String object that represents the same sequence of characters as str   
int length()— Returns the number of characters in a String object   
§ String substring(int from, int to)—Returns the substring beginning at index from and ending at index to − 1 String substring(int from) — Returns substring(from, length())   
int indexOf(String str) — Returns the index of the first occurrence of str; returns -1 if not found   
boolean equals(String other) — Returns true if this is equal to other; returns false otherwise int compareTo(String other) — Returns a value $<0$ if this is less than other; returns zero if this is equal to other; returns a value $>0$ if this is greater than other  

# VAR-1.E.13  

A string identical to the single element substring at position index can be created by calling substring(index, index $^+\beth$ ).  

# SUGGESTED SKILL  

Determine the result or output based on the statement execution order in a code segment containing method calls.