# TOPIC 5.3 Documentation with Comments  

# AVAILABLE RESOURCE  

External Resource $>$ Zeroturnaround: Reasons, Tips and Tricks for Better Java Documentation  

# Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# MOD-2  

Programmers use code to represent a physical object or nonphysical concept, real or imagined, by defining a class based on the attributes and/or behaviors of the object or concept.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# MOD-2.C  

Describe the functionality and use of program code through comments.  

# MOD-2.C.1  

Comments are ignored by the compiler and are not executed when the program is run.  

# MOD-2.C.2  

Three types of comments in Java include $/\star\star/$ , which generates a block of comments, $//$ , which generates a comment on one line, and $/\star\star\star/\$ , which are Javadoc comments and are used to create API documentation.  

# MOD-2.C.3  

A precondition is a condition that must be true just prior to the execution of a section of program code in order for the method to behave as expected. There is no expectation that the method will check to ensure preconditions are satisfied.  

# MOD-2.C.4  

A postcondition is a condition that must always be true after the execution of a section of program code. Postconditions describe the outcome of the execution in terms of what is being returned or the state of an object.  

# MOD-2.C.5  

Programmers write method code to satisfy the postconditions when preconditions are met.