# TOPIC 5.7 Static Variables and Methods  

# Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# MOD-2  

Programmers use code to represent a physical object or nonphysical concept, real or imagined, by defining a class based on the attributes and/or behaviors of the object or concept.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# MOD-2.G  

Define behaviors of a class through static methods.  

# MOD-2.G.1  

Static methods are associated with the class, not objects of the class.  

# MOD-2.G.2  

Static methods include the keyword static in the header before the method name.  

# MOD-2.G.3  

Static methods cannot access or change the values of instance variables.  

# MOD-2.G.4  

Static methods can access or change the values of static variables.  

# MOD-2.G.5  

Static methods do not have a this reference and are unable to use the class’s instance variables or call non-static methods.  

# MOD-2.H  

Define the static variables that belong to the class.  

# MOD-2.H.1  

Static variables belong to the class, with all objects of a class sharing a single static variable.  

# Writing Classes  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

MOD-2.H  

# MOD-2.H.2  

Define the static variables that belong to the class.  

Static variables can be designated as either public or private and are designated with the static keyword before the variable type.  

# MOD-2.H.3  

Static variables are used with the class name and the dot operator, since they are associated with a class, not objects of a class.  

# SUGGESTED SKILLS