# TOPIC 6.1 Array Creation and Access  

# Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# VAR-2  

To manage large amounts of data or complex relationships in data, programmers write code that groups the data together into a single data structure without creating individual variables for each value.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# VAR-2.A  

# VAR-2.A.1  

Represent collections of related primitive or object reference data using onedimensional (1D) array objects.  

The use of array objects allows multiple related items to be represented using a single variable.  

# VAR-2.A.2  

The size of an array is established at the time of creation and cannot be changed.  

# VAR-2.A.3  

Arrays can store either primitive data or object reference data.  

# VAR-2.A.4  

When an array is created using the keyword new, all of its elements are initialized with a specific value based on the type of elements:  

· Elements of type int are initialized to 0   
· Elements of type double are initialized to 0 . 0   
· Elements of type boolean are initialized to false   
· Elements of a reference type are initialized to the reference value null. No objects are automatically created  

# VAR-2.A.5  

Initializer lists can be used to create and initialize arrays.  

# Array  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# VAR-2.A  

# VAR-2.A.6  

Represent collections of related primitive or object reference data using onedimensional (1D) array objects.  

Square brackets ([ ]) are used to access and modify an element in a 1D array using an index.  

# VAR-2.A.7  

The valid index values for an array are 0 through one less than the number of elements in the array, inclusive. Using an index value outside of this range will result in an ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException being thrown.  

# Array  

# SUGGESTED SKILLS  

Determine the result or output based on statement execution order in a code segment without method calls (other than output).  

Write program code to create, traverse, and manipulate elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects.