# TOPIC 6.3 Enhanced for Loop for Arrays  

# Required Course Content  

Write program code to create, traverse, and manipulate elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects.  

# 4.C  

Determine if two or more code segments yield equivalent results.  

# SUGGESTED SKILLS  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# VAR-2  

To manage large amounts of data or complex relationships in data, programmers write code that groups the data together into a single data structure without creating individual variables for each value.  

# AVAILABLE RESOURCES  

Runestone Academy: AP CSA—Java Review: 8.2—Looping with the For-Each Loop Practice-It!: BJP4 Chapter 7: Arrays— Exercises 7.1–7.18  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# VAR-2.C  

Traverse the elements in a 1D array object using an enhanced for loop.  

# VAR-2.C.1  

An enhanced for loop header includes a variable, referred to as the enhanced for loop variable.  

# VAR-2.C.2  

For each iteration of the enhanced for loop, the enhanced for loop variable is assigned a copy of an element without using its index.  

# VAR-2.C.3  

Assigning a new value to the enhanced for loop variable does not change the value stored in the array.  

# VAR-2.C.4  

Program code written using an enhanced for loop to traverse and access elements in an array can be rewritten using an indexed for loop or a while loop.  

# SUGGESTED SKILLS  

Determine code that would be used to complete code segments.  

Write program code to create, traverse, and manipulate elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects.  

Describe the initial conditions that must be met for a program segment to work as intended or described.  

# AVAILABLE RESOURCES  

Runestone Academy: AP CSA—Java Review: 8.13—Free-Response Questions · CodingBat Java: Array 3 Practice-It!:BJP4 Chapter 7: Array— Exercises 7.1–7.18  

# Array