# TOPIC 7.2 ArrayList Methods  

# SUGGESTED SKILLS  

# 2.C  

Determine the result or output based on the statement execution order in a code segment containing method calls.  

Write program code to create, traverse, and manipulate elements in 1D array or ArrayList objects.  

# Required Course Content  

# ENDURING UNDERSTANDING  

# VAR-2  

To manage large amounts of data or complex relationships in data, programmers write code that groups the data together into a single data structure without creating individual variables for each value.  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

# VAR-2.D  

# VAR-2.D.6  

Represent collections of related object reference data using ArrayList objects.  

The ArrayList class is part of the java. util package. An import statement can be used to make this class available for use in the program.  

# VAR-2.D.7  

The following ArrayList methods— including what they do and when they are used—are part of the Java Quick Reference:  

int size()-Returns the number of elements in the list   
boolean add(E obj)-Appends obj to end of list; returns true   
void add(int index, E obj)- Inserts obj at position index ( $0\quad<=$ index $<=$ size), moving elements at position index and higher to the right (adds 1 to their indices) and adds 1 to size   
E get(int index)-Returnsthe element at position index in the list   
E set(int index，E obj)— Replaces the element at position index with obj; returns the element formerly at position index  

# AVAILABLE RESOURCES  

■ Java Quick Reference (see Appendix)   
Practice-It!: BJP4 Chapter 10: ArrayLists—Exercises 10.2–10.17 The Exam $>$ 2017 AP Computer Science A Exam Free-Response Question #1, Part A (Digits)  

# ArrayList  

# LEARNING OBJECTIVE  

VAR-2.D  

Represent collections of related object reference data using ArrayList objects.  

# ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE  

· E remove(int index)-Removes element from position index, moving elements at position index $^+\beth$ and higher to the left (subtracts 1 from their indices) and subtracts 1 from size; returns the element formerly at position index